doc: add plugin driver event schema check proposal (#2646)
falcosecurity/libs: proposals/20250923-plugin-system-event-schema-versioning.md

# Proposal for the introduction of driver event schema version check in the Plugin System

## Summary

> This proposal introduces a comprehensive event schema version validation system for the Falco plugin framework. The system will provide runtime validation of the event schema version related to the events generated by the drivers, that can be consumed by plugins providing parsing and/or field extraction capabilities. This will ensure backward compatibility and clear error reporting for plugins that depend on specific schema versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal introduces a comprehensive event schema version validation system for the Falco plugin framework. The system will provide runtime validation of the event schema version related to events emitted by libscap, which can be consumed by plugins that provide parsing and/or field extraction capabilities. This will ensure backward compatibility and clear error reporting for plugins that depend on specific schema versions.
```

## Motivation

> The current Falco plugin system only checks the Plugin API version, but there is no check on the driver event schema version. This means that there is no guarantee that a given plugin with parsing or field extraction capabilities works across Falco versions with different schema versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current Falco plugin system only checks the Plugin API version, but there is no check on the [SCHEMA_VERSION](https://github.com/falcosecurity/libs/blob/master/driver/README.VERSION.md#schema-version-number). This means that there is no guarantee that a given plugin with parsing or field extraction capabilities works across Falco versions with different schema versions.
```

1. **Runtime Validation**: There's no mechanism for plugins consuming driver events to declare the required schema version
1. **Version Compatibility**: No way to enforce compatibility between plugins and the event schema version

## Goals

- Implement a comprehensive driver event schema validation system for plugins
- Provide backward compatibility guarantees for schema evolution
- Enable runtime schema validation with clear error reporting
- Not breaking the existing plugin APIs (this should be additive)

## Non-Goals

- Guaranteeing interoperability between plugins using the plugin event type
  (this is out of scope for now)

## Proposal

### 1. Required schema version declaration

The plugins should declare the required schema version in the following cases.

- field extraction capability, unless the plugin will only receive events of the plugin type
- event parsing capability, unless the plugin will only receive events of the plugin type

If the plugin does not declare a required schema version, it is assumed that it
is compatible with 3.0.0, the initial major version at the time the plugin

> event schema validation is introduced.

Reviewer: Since this validation check **is introduced at the same time as bumping the SCHEMA_VERSION to 4.0.0** (it is worth mentioning this in the proposal due to its relevance), the version check does not pass in any case (since `3` is always not equal to `>=4`).

Thus, we can simplify this by saying that the validation will always fail when a plugin does not declare a required schema version or declare a version minor of `4.0.0`.

Author: I did like this to stay consistent with the current state. The bump of the major schema version did not happen yet. Anyway, I clarified that 3.0.0 is the major version of the release that pre-dates the introduction of the check.

    - Check if `get_extract_event_types` is not defined or provides an empty array and `m_extract_event_sources` contains `"syscall"`
    - Check if `get_extract_event_types` provides an array containing at least a driver event
    - Do not check otherwise, because only plugin events are consumed
- If the plugin only provides event sourcing capabilities (`CAP_SOURCING`) or async capabilities (`CAP_ASYNC`), no check is needed

In this case, the event schema version check must be performed.

### 3. Schema Version Compatibility Check

In case the check is required, the following logic is applied:

1. **Default schema version:**
   - If the plugin does not implement the `get_required_schema_version` function,
     it is assumed that it is compatible with schema version `3.0.0`

2. **Version string validation:**
   - If the plugin implements the `get_required_schema_version` function, the
     returned version string is parsed and validated
   - The version string must follow the semver format: `"<major>.<minor>.<patch>"`
   - If the version string is malformed or cannot be parsed, the plugin load fails with an error

3. **Version compatibility check:**

>    - The driver event schema version in use in the current Falco libs version is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - The event schema version in use in the current Falco libs version is
```

     compared with the required schema version declared by the plugin
   - **Major version incompatibility:** If the major versions differ, the plugin load fails
   - **Minor version incompatibility:** If the major versions match but the plugin requires a higher minor version than available, the plugin load fails
   - **Patch version:** Patch version differences are allowed (backward compatible)

4. **Error handling:**
   - **Malformed version string:** `"plugin provided an invalid required schema version: '<version>'"`
   - **Major version mismatch:** `"plugin required schema version '<version>' not compatible with the driver schema version '<version>': major versions disagree"`
   - **Minor version mismatch:** `"plugin required schema version '<version>' not compatible with the driver schema version '<version>': driver schema minor version is less than the requested one"`

### 4. Implementation Details

The implementation will require the following changes:

1. **Plugin API Extension:**
   - Add `get_required_schema_version` function pointer to the `plugin_api` struct

>    - Place it after `get_required_api_version` for logical grouping

Reviewer 2: This breaks binary compatibility with static plugins :( We can work around it but could we put it at the end of the struct instead?

Author: Actually, after giving a second thought I'm not sure about what's matter the most between compatibility of static plugins and API header file consistency and readability. Anyway I updated the proposal and we can decide at implementation time.
